title: booking.com — One Year In.
abstract: In which I reflect on my first twelve months at booking.com
author: Stuart Frisby
date: 2012-03-02 15:00
ds: March 2
dss: Mar 2
template: article.jade

I wrote a year ago about the process of interviewing with [booking.com](http://booking.com) & have managed to mention little of what its been like to actually work here for the past twelve months. I get lots of traffic coming my way from people trying to find out what it's like to do my job, and so I figured I'd talk a little bit about what we do, and the philosophy which I think sets us apart from lots of other companies operating at our scale on the web, maybe this'll be a better source of information than my post from last April.

Coming from agency-land, and having worked for clients for the entirety of my short career, I was excited at the prospect of having a direct connection with the people interacting with my work, and that has proven to be a continuously motivating factor in my role with booking.com. We - the front-end team of approximately 60 people - have a sharp, constant focus on our users. Everything we seek to do is aimed at making the experience of using our website measurably better for our customers. We have a common language which encourages us to constantly reflect on a single question, 'How does this help our users?'. Note that the question isn't 'How does this make us more money?' - Whilst money is of course a key measurement for success, our focus is on making improvements to the user experience which in turn make our users happier & more loyal. We could come up with a thousand ideas to increase revenue tomorrow, but we are encouraged to be cognisant of the distinction between short-term gains, and long-term improvements. When we assess and critique ideas from the perspective of the user, we are able to differentiate between the two, and be the advocates for our millions of customers.

And behind that mass of users for whom we aim to please is a mass of data to which we - designers, developers, product owners - are given free access. We operate at a scale where we are very quickly able to see if what we're doing is an improvement, and we encourage and are encouraged to be mindful, commercially focused and vigilant. Throughout my pre-booking.com career I was used to creating work to a brief, with no access to the end users, and no opportunities to measure if what I'd done had actually made a positive difference. I would fall-back on the knowledge I'd gained from blogs and books and experience and expertise. Luckily I no longer have to do that, and I say luckily because I know now that in the vast majority of cases, I was wrong. I still am. I'm wrong the majority of the time. Once I'd have called myself an expert, now I'm constantly aware of how little I - or anyone - really knows about how people behave on the web, what they do and don't understand, like, enjoy and delight in. I'm wrong more often than I'm right, and yet somehow I still haven't been shown out of the building…

We embrace failure like an over-enthusiastic grandma embraces her favourite grandson, for every failure is a deposit in a vault of knowledge. Every failure is a step towards a subsequent success, or a debunking of a popular belief, and at best a raised middle-finger to our industry's all-too-many 'experts'. But failure isn't our goal, learning is. Failing for the sake of failing would be stupid, failing so that you can later succeed is brilliant, especially when - as at booking.com - the endorsement of this kind of failure comes from the very top of the organisation.

My favourite thing about working at booking is that I'm surrounded by an incredibly diverse group of people, most of whom - like me - moved to the Netherlands for their job, and who are chosen because amongst other things, they are passionate about the work they do. I used to be the only designer working on websites, and whilst that gives you great freedom, it also gives you an easy ride. I know that at booking.com I will be tapped gently on the shoulder when I've overlooked something, or when I could've done a better job. Our millions of users, and my front-end colleagues will see to that.

In terms of process, structure, pace and agility, booking is quite unlike most businesses of its size. There is no prescribed way of working, no defined set of tools, no rigid working hours. I rock up at 8:30 in the morning, others stroll in at 10:30. I use a notepad and a set of preposterously over-elaborate pens for wireframing, others use whiteboards, post-its and hallway conversations & so long as you can push commits to a git repository, no-one cares what you crafted them with. Our large team is sub-divided into small teams of ~5 people, a mix of designers, developers, copywriters, product owners & specialists (language specialists, statisticians, usability researchers, platform developers, psychologists, etc.) - that gives us a small, scrum-like style of work. We work quickly, innovate & ideate quickly, and try not to build complex, rigid processes which put barriers between ideas and execution. Of course there is an ebb and flow, some days that works flawlessly, some days less so - we are always improving and monitoring our way of working, and with a growing team, always making adjustments which aim to make it as easy as possible for designers to design, developers to develop, and users to use our website.

All-in-all, working as a designer at booking.com has proven to be an eye-opening, challenging, rewarding experience - and one which continues to to be all three on a daily basis. I can't imagine there are many companies where a designer is given the privilege of serving so many users, and the freedom to serve them in whatever way suits them best.